---
---
Creating a guide 
================

### Context 

Meaning-carrying tools, like handbooks or maps, can help collect content
and stories as well as assist others who want to adopt the idea.

### Problem 

Established ideas have knowledge cartography challenges for newcomers,
consider trying to decipher a subway map in a foreign city. When the
idea or system is only “newly discovered”, the associated meanings may
not be well understood, and indeed they may not have been created. Even
if a topic is only “personally new”, it can be hard to find one’s way
around.

### Solution 

The process of creating the guide can go hand-in-hand with figuring out
how the system works. Thus, techniques of [knowledge
cartography](http://knowledgecartography.org/) and [meaning
making](http://www.hitl.washington.edu/publications/r-97-47/two.html)
are useful for would-be guide creators.[^1]

### Rationale 

It is important to keep in mind how “the map is not the territory,” and
map-making is only one facet of shared human activity. For instance, a
pattern description can be thought of as a “micro-map” of a specific
activity. These maps are not useful if they are divorced from practice.
The process of creating a guide creates a certain formality to the
project, forcing participants to catalogue and explicate their idea.
Additionally, the act generally leads to deadlines which can help prod
individuals to work on the project more regularly.

### Resolution 

Writing down this pattern clarifies the importance of creating a guide
for your idea if you want others to adopt it for use.[^2] If people
complain that they are confused, now we know why.

### What’s Next 

Working with our shepherd at PLoP to improve this paper![^3]

![Design sketch for possible updated Peeragogy project dashboard (image
by Amanda Lyons, used with
permission).](figures/peeragogy_dashboard_draft1/peeragogy_dashboard_draft1.jpg)

[^1]: We started the Peeragogy project by collaboratively making an
    outline for the Peeragogy Handbook. We recommended this
    handbook-making practice to others, as a way to learn
    collaboratively and build a strong group.

[^2]: As [Richard
    Stallman](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-doc.html) wrote about
    free software documentation: “The biggest deficiency in free
    operating systems is not in the software—it is the lack of good free
    manuals that we can include in these systems. Many of our most
    important programs do not come with full manuals. Documentation is
    an essential part of any software package; when an important free
    software package does not come with a free manual, that is a major
    gap.”

[^3]: Regarding connections with programming per se: we are not
    currently making software in the Peeragogy project, but we do
    continually evaluate and assemble software tools to support our
    activities. We often run into “bottleneck” problems; see
    <span>**Carrying capacity**</span>. The better we are able to
    exposit the problems we’re dealing with, the more likely it is that
    our high-level analysis (and synthesis) has the potential to inform
    future programming work.

