#+title: Heartbeat
#+FIRN_ORDER: 14

* Motivation
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: motivation
    :END:

This pattern can help project participants stay in touch, and stay
motivated.

* Context
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: context
    :END:

A number of people have a shared interest, and have connected with each
other about it. However, they are not going to spend 24 hours a day, 7
days a week working together, either because they are busy with other
things, or because working separately on some tasks is vastly more
efficient.

* Forces
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: forces
    :END:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  [[file:images/differentiation.png]] *Differentiation*: the time we
  spend together isn't all equally meaningful.

  [[file:images/entropy.png]] *Entropy*: something needs to hold the
  project together, or it will fall apart.
#+END_QUOTE

* Problem
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: problem
    :END:

How will the effort be sustained and coordinated sufficiently? How do we
know this an active collaboration, and not just a bunch of people
milling about? Is there a /there, there?/

* Solution
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: solution
    :END:

People seem to naturally gravitate to something with a pulse. /Once a
day/ (stand-ups), /once a week/ (meetings), or /once a year/
(conferences, festivals) are common variants. When the project is
populated by more than just a few people, it's likely that there will be
several Heartbeats, building a sophisticated polyrhythm. A well-running
project will feel "like an improvisational jazz ensemble" [1]. Much as
the band director may gesture to specific players to invite them to solo
or sync up, a project facilitator may craft individual emails to ask
someone to lead an activity or invite them to re-engage. Two common
rhythm components are weekly synchronous meetings with an open agenda,
combined with /ad hoc/ meetings for focused work on A specific project.
The precise details will depend on the degree of integration required by
the group.

* Rationale
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: rationale
    :END:

The project's heartbeat is what sustains it. Just as
/people matter more than code/ [2], so does the life of the working group matter more than
mechanics of the work structure. Indeed, there is an quick way to do a
reality check and find the project's strongest pulse: the activities
that sustain a healthy project should sustain us, too (cf.
[[file:pattern-carrying.org][Carrying capacity]]).

* Resolution
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: resolution
    :END:

Noticing when a new Heartbeat is beginning to emerge is a way to be
aware of the shifting priorities in the group, and contributes to
further *differentiation*. This may ultimately be a good source of new
patterns. On the other hand, if a specific activity is no longer
sustaining the project, stop doing it, much as you would move an
out-of-date pattern to the [[file:scrapbook.org][Scrapbook]] in order to make room for other
concerns. The power of the Heartbeat is that the project can be as
focused and intensive as it needs to be, working against *entropy* in
the ways that start to be required as time goes by.

* Example 1
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: example-1
    :END:

The yearly in-person gathering, Wikimania, is the most visible example
of a Heartbeat for the Wikimedia movement.[fn:1] may run additional
in-person get-togethers.[fn:2] Also of note is the twice-yearly call for
proposals for individual engagement grants.[fn:3] other shorter cycles.
Each day a highly-vetted Featured Article appears on the front page of
Wikipedia, and is circulated to a special-purpose mailing
list.[fn:4],[fn:5],[fn:6] articles for deletion lasts at least seven
days.[fn:7]

[[file:images/kapisa.jpg]]
/University Farm: al-Biruni University, Kapisa province, Afghanistan./

* Example 2
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: example-2
    :END:

Although it may sound quaint, some variant of the University Farm could
help to physically sustain peeragogues, while putting the project's
Heartbeat in tune with that of the seasons. In the current distributed
mode, we tend our window boxes and allotment gardens. New developments
should unfold in a /logical order growing out of the needs of the
community/ [3].

* What's Next in the Peeragogy Project
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: whats-next-in-the-peeragogy-project
    :END:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  Actual meeting times to be added
#+END_QUOTE

Identifying and fostering new Heartbeats and new working groups can help
make the community more robust. This is the time dimension of spin-off
projects described in Reduce, reuse, recycle.

* References
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: references
    :END:

1. David M. Dikel, David Kane, and James R. Wilson. 2001. /Software
   architecture: Organizational principles and patterns/. Pearson
   Education.

2. Linus Torvalds and Steven Vaughan-Nichols. 2011. Linus Torvalds's
   Lessons on Software Development Management. /Input Output/. Retrieved
   from
   [[http://web.archive.org/web/20131021211847/http://h30565.www3.hp.com/t5/Feature-Articles/Linus-Torvalds-s-Lessons-on-Software-Development-Management/ba-p/440]]

3. Booker T Washington. 1901. /Up from slavery/. Doubleday & Company,
   Inc.

--------------

[fn:1] [[https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Wikimania]]

[fn:2] [[http://wikiconferenceusa.org/]]

[fn:3] [[https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Grants:IEG]]

[fn:4] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Today%27s_featured_article]]

[fn:5] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Featured_article_candidates]]

[fn:6] [[https://lists.wikimedia.org/mailman/listinfo/daily-article-l]]

[fn:7] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Articles_for_deletion]]
