---
title: Landmarks
---

Landmarks from the life of peeragogy 
====================================

Feedback from two novice course organizers
------------------------------------------

*Before the Peeragogy project as such was convened, two of us realised
that “peer produced peer learning” could benefit from further
theoretical and practical development. Here is a summary of our early
thoughts as volunteer course organizers at the Peer-2-Peer University
(P2PU):*

▶ Our best experiences as course organizers happened when we were
committed to working through the material ourselves. Combining this with
gently prompting peers to follow through on their commitments could go a
long way towards keeping engagement at a reasonable level – but this
only works when commitments are somewhat clear in the first place.

▶ It is typical for online communities to have strictly enforced
community norms. It would be helpful to have a concise discussion of
these available, together with up to date information on “best
practices” for organizers and participants. The current Course Design
Handbook provides one starting point, but it falls short of being a
complete guide to P2PU.

▶ In a traditional university, there are typically a lot of ways to
resolve problems without dropping out. P2PU’s new “Help Desk” could help
with this issue – if people use it.

▶ P2PU would have to work hard to use anything but “participation” as a
proxy value for “learning.” In terms of broader issues of quality
control, one serious thought is for P2PU core members (including staff)
to use the platform to organize their activities – entirely in the open.

▶ It is our firm belief that P2PU should work on a public roadmap that
leads from now up to the point where the vision is achieved. Both vision
and roadmap should be revised as appropriate.

The “FLOK Doc”
--------------

*In 2013, Ecuador launched the Free/Libre/Open Knowledge Society Project
to facilitate the transition to a ‘*buen saber*’, or ‘good knowledge’
society, which is an extension of the official strategy towards a ‘*buen
vivir*’-based society. The Peeragogy project contributed a brief to help
develop this plan. Here are some highlights:*

Ecuador has a law about free software and open knowledge (*Decreto
1014*, launched 2008). Article 32 of the *Ley orgánica de Educación
Superior* makes open source software mandatory for higher education.
Public universities are building their own OER repositories. What
peeragogy can offer are are working methods for co-producing relevant
Open Educational Resources on a wider scale. As such, peeragogy is
especially relevant to the goals and working methods of the *Human
Capabilities* stream of the FLOK project, but here are some ways it
could affect the other streams:

▶ *Commons-oriented Productive Capacities* will require people to learn
new ways of working. Can we start to build a peeragogical “extension
school”, by collaborating on a new handbook about sustainable
agricultural techniques?

▶ *Social Infrastructure and Institutional Innovation* will require
collaboration between many different agencies, local enterprises, and
global organizations. Can peeragogy help these groups cooperate
effectively? Coauthoring a handbook about inter-agency cooperation could
help.

▶ *Hardware and Connectivity* needs to be connected to documentation and
active, participatory, support that shows how to use and adapt new
technologies to our use cases.

▶ *Commons’ Infrastructure for Collective Life* could co-develop along
with a pattern language that shows how to interconnect elements of
knowledge and practical solutions that are (re)generative of the commons
and relevant to learners’ needs.

<img class="displayed" src="./images/flok1.jpg" alt="Peeragogy in relation to the FLOK Society Project" style="width: 600px;"/>

<img class="displayed" src="./images/flok2.jpg" alt="Peeragogy is especially relevant to the goals and working methods of the Human Capabilities Stream of the FLOK Society Project" style="width: 600px;"/>

New strategies for “good faith collaboration”
---------------------------------------------

*We’re strongly in favor of the Wikimedia Foundation’s mission, “to
empower and engage people around the world to collect and develop
educational content under a free license or in the public domain, and
to disseminate it effectively and globally.” We hope peeragogy can
contribute to this and other free/open efforts to constructively
reshape the way education works in the future. Some values we
share with the Wikipedia project:*

▶ *Neutral POV*: Pretty much anyone can write an article for the
*Peeragogy Handbook* on anything related to peer learning and peer
production. We’ll help review and edit to make the work shine. Rather
than requiring each individual article to be neutral, we strive for
overall comprehensiveness.

▶ *Free content*: We’ve taken the radical step of putting material in
the handbook into the public domain, which means that anyone can reuse
material in the handbook for any purpose whatsoever, without asking
permission or even giving us attribution. The reason being: we want to
make re-use, application, and extension of this work as simple as
possible.

▶ *Respect and civility*: We strive to focus on learning. If someone
disagrees with a given choice, we remember that in true dialogue there
are no right or wrong answers and no one in charge. If someone seems to
be frustrated with the way the project is going, we ask why and attempt
to learn from them about what we could change – in order to learn more.

▶ *No firm rules*: The project roadmap is fluid, and our understanding
of the idea of “peeragogy” is revised and extended as we go. The living
patterns we catalog (in Part [practice-part]) aren’t prescriptive but
they do seem to reappear with variation across different learning
scenarios. We don’t have a fixed platform or leadership structure, but
use whatever tools and teams seem most suitable for the purpose at hand.
