#+title: Newcomer
#+FIRN_ORDER: 15

* Motivation
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: motivation
    :END:

This pattern can help project participants be aware of the issues faced
by newcomers, and cultivate a "beginner's mind" themselves.

* Context
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: context
    :END:

When there's learning happening, it's because there is someone who is
new to a topic, or to something about the topic.

* Forces
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: forces
    :END:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  [[file:images/individuation.png]] *Individuation*: each person
  learning optimally is what's best for the community.

  [[file:images/mutuality.png]] *Mutuality*: our individuality does not
  isolate us from one another, but draws us together.
#+END_QUOTE

* Problem
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: problem
    :END:

Newcomers can feel overwhelmed by the amount of things to learn. They
often don't know where to start. They may have a bunch of ideas that the
old-timers have never considered -- or they may think they have new
ideas, which are actually a different take on an old idea; see [[file:reduce_reuse_recycle.org][Reduce, reuse, recycle]].
People who are new to the project can tell you what
makes their participation difficult. Since you're learning as you go as
well, you can ask yourself the same question: what aspects of this
encounter are difficult for me?

* Solution
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: solution
    :END:

Instead of thinking of newcomers as "them", and trying to provide
solutions, we focus on newcomers as "us" -- which makes the search for
solutions that much more urgent. We permit ourselves to ask naive
questions. We entertain vague ideas. We add concreteness by trying A
specific project. We may then genuinely turn to others for help. We aim
to foster a culture in which the focus for everyone is on addressing our
own learning challenges rather than on "providing" solutions for others
[1]. When you begin a new project, try to systematically take notes and
gather data to analyze and reflect upon later; leave artifacts for other
future newcomers to use and build upon in their own research. In
practice this may be a lot to ask for someone just joining a group, but
over time we may have many ways to structure our collective engagement
so that it leads to research cycles based on the "action research" steps
/reflect/, /plan/, /act/, and /observe/. Note that there is a parallel
with the four facets /assess/, /convene/, /organize/, /cooperate/ from
Figure [fig:connections]. The history of the action research approach,
with particular emphasis on educational applications, is surveyed in
[5]. One method for doing the reflection/assessment step is presented in
the [[file:scrapbook.org][Scrapbook]] pattern. Be flexible: networked attention (even more so
than rigid cycles [3]) leads to new ways of knowing and expanded access
to knowledge-production [7,8].

* Rationale
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: rationale
    :END:

A newcomer's confusion about how best to get involved or what the point
of all this actually is may be due to a lack of structure in the project
Roadmap. Sharing vulnerability and confusion gives us a chance to learn.

* Resolution
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: resolution
    :END:

An awareness of the difficulties that newcomers face can help us be more
compassionate to ourselves and others. We strengthen the community by
supporting all participants' *individuation*. We have a better chance of
making the project useful for others if we're clear about how it is
useful to /us/. By welcoming newcomers, we enhance the sense of
*mutuality* with people who have never encountered the project before,
and learn together with them. The facts start to become useful when we
understand how people perceive them [4].

* Example 1
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: example-1
    :END:

Wikipedia Newcomers can make use of resources that include a "Teahouse"
where questions are welcomed, a platform extension that changes the user
interface for new editors, and lots of
documentation.[fn:1],[fn:2],[fn:3] exceptional newcomers may be given
special recognition.[fn:4] interest to the Wikimedia Foundation.[fn:5]
However, "Nearly all editors begin with a burst of activity, then
quickly tail off" [6]. The degree to which those editors who are
retained strive to maintain a "beginner's mind" is less clear. As
regards learning their way around the community, there is quantitative
support [6] for the claim that "novice users learn the rules and
conventions for contributing both through observation and direct
coaching from more knowledgeable others" [2].

[[file:images/The_Science_Laboratory.jpg]]\\
/Science Hall: Aspatria Agricultural College, Aspatria, Cumberland, UK/

* Example 2
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: example-2
    :END:

It will often be pragmatic to connect Newcomers with employment
directly, so that the future university may see a closer coupling of
science and industry than would be found in the old Science Hall.
Inspiration can be drawn the London-based freelancing cooperative
Founders&Coders, which is able to offer intensive training in web
development at no cost to successful applicants, on the basis that some
trainees will choose to join the cooperative as paying members later
on.[fn:6]

* What's Next in the Peeragogy Project
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: whats-next-in-the-peeragogy-project
    :END:

More detailed guides can show Newcomers how they can contribute and what
to expect when they do. We should have different guides for different
"user stories". We can start by listing some of the things we're
currently learning about.

* References
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: references
    :END:

1. D. Boud and A. Lee. 2005. "Peer learning" as pedagogic discourse for
   research education. /Studies in Higher Education/ 30, 5: 501--516.

2. Susan L Bryant, Andrea Forte, and Amy Bruckman. 2005. Becoming
   Wikipedian: Transformation of participation in a collaborative online
   encyclopedia. /Proceedings of the 2005 international aCM sIGGROUP
   conference on supporting group work/, ACM, 1--10.

3. Y. Engeström. 1999. Innovative learning in work teams: Analyzing
   cycles of knowledge creation in practice. In /Perspectives on
   activity theory/, Yrjö Engeström, Reijo Miettinen and Raija-Leena
   Punamäki (eds.). Cambridge University Press, 377--406.

4. Paulo Freire. 1982. Creating alternative research methods: Learning
   to do it by doing it. In /Creating knowledge: A monopoly/, B. Hall,
   A. Gillette and R. Tandon (eds.). Society for Participatory Research
   in Asia, 29--37.

5. Jean McNiff. 2013. /Action research: Principles and practice/.
   Routledge.

6. Katherine Panciera, Aaron Halfaker, and Loren Terveen. 2009.
   Wikipedians are born, not made: A study of power editors on
   Wikipedia. /Proceedings of the aCM 2009 international conference on
   supporting group work/, ACM, 51--60.

7. Gilbert Simondon. 2012. Technical mentality. In /Gilbert Simondon:
   Being and technology/, Arne De Boever, Alex Murray, Jon Roffe and
   Ashley Woodward (eds.). Oxford University Press, 1--15.

8. C.S. Wagner. 2008. /The new invisible college: Science for
   development/. Brookings Inst Press.

--------------

[fn:1] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse]]

[fn:2] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:GettingStarted]]

[fn:3] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Editing]]

[fn:4] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:The_New_Editor%27s_Barnstar]]

[fn:5] [[https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Research:Newcomer_survival_models]]

[fn:6] [[http://www.foundersandcoders.com/academy/]]

