---
title: Peeragogy
---

## Peeragogy

### Motivation 

This pattern is relevant to anyone who wants to do active learning
together with others in a relatively non-hierarchical setting.

### Context 

Collaborative projects like Wikipedia, StackExchange, and FLOSS
represent an implicit challenge to the old “industrial” organization of
work. This new way of working appears to promise something more
resilient, more exciting, and more humane. The rhetoric has been
questioned <span class="citation">\[3,9\]</span>. In and across these
“free”, “open”, post-modern organizations, individual participants are
learning <span class="citation">\[7\]</span> – and that they
collectively change the methods and infrastructure as they go. Because
everyone in these projects primarily learns by putting in effort on a
shared work-in-progress, participants are more in touch with an
*equality of intelligence* than an *inequality of knowledge* <span
class="citation">\[4:38, 119\]</span>. At the same time, they invoke a
form of friendly competition, in which *the best craftmanship wins*
<span class="citation">\[5:89\]</span>.

### Forces


> ![image](images/threshold.png) **Threshold**: inclusiveness and specificity are in tension.  
> ![image](images/trust.png) **Trust**: is only built through sharing and reciprocity.

### Problem

Even a highly successful project like Wikipedia is a work in progress
that can be improved to *better* empower and engage people around the
world, to develop *richer and more useful* educational content, and to
disseminate it *more* effectively – and deploy it more
creatively.[^fnref1] How to go about this is a
difficult question, and we don’t know the answers in advance. There are
rigorous challenges facing smaller projects as well, and fewer resources
to draw on. Many successful free software projects are not particularly
collaborative – and the largest projects are edited only by a small
minority of users <span class="citation">\[2,10\]</span>. Can we work
smarter together?

### Solution 

The act of asking “can we work smarter together?” puts learning front
and center. Peeragogy takes that “center” and distributes it across a
pool of heterogeneous relationships. Indeed, peeragogy can be understood
as an up-to-date revision of Alexander’s <span><span>Network of
Learning</span></span> <span class="citation">\[1:99\]</span>. It
*decentralizes the process of learning and enriches it through contact
with many places and people* in interconnected networks that may reach
all over the world. Importantly, while people involved in a peeragogical
process may be collaborating on <span><span>A specific
project</span></span>, they don’t have to be direct collaborators
outside of the learning context or co-located in time or space. Just as
theories and practices of pedagogy articulate the transmission of
knowledge from teachers to students, peeragogy articulates the way peers
produce and use knowledge together (Figure \[fig:connections\]).

### Rationale 

The peeragogical approach particularly addresses the problems of small
projects stuck in their individual silos, and large projects becoming
overwhelmed by their own complexity. It does this by going the opposite
route: explicating *what by definition is tacit* and employing *a
continuous design process* <span class="citation">\[8:9–10\]</span>. As
Howard Rheingold remarks in the foreword to the *Peeragogy Handbook*:
“What made this work? Polycentric leadership is one key” <span
class="citation">\[6:iii\]</span>. “Peer-led” shouldn’t suggest that
there are no leaders: rather, it means that multiple leaders act as
peers.

### Resolution 

Peeragogy helps people in different projects describe and solve real
problems. If you share the problems that you’re experiencing with
others, there’s a reasonable chance that someone may be able to help you
solve them. Bringing a problem across the **threshold** of someone
else’s awareness helps achieve clarity. This process can guide
individual action in ways that we wouldn’t have seen on our own, and may
lead to new forms of collective action we would never have imagined
possible. People who gain experience comprehending problems together
build **trust**. Making room for multiple right answers contributes
further to resolving the tension between generality and specificity.

### Example 1 

Wikipedia and its sister sites Wiktionary, Wikiversity, etc.
(collectively “Wikimedia”) rely on user-generated content, peer produced
software, and are managed, by and large, by a pool of users who choose
to get involved with governance and other “meta”
duties.[^fnref2] The Wikimedia Foundation
maintains the servers and acts on behalf of this “global movement”. They
achieve something quite impressive: Wikipedia is the 7<sup>th</sup> most popular
website in the world, but the Wikimedia Foundation has under 300
employees. For comparison, the 6<sup>th</sup> (Amazon) and 8<sup>th</sup> (QQ) most
popular websites are run by companies with over 200K and 28K employees,
respectively.[^fnref3]<sup>,</sup>[^fnref4]<sup>,</sup>[^fnref5]<sup>,</sup>[^fnref6]

![image](images/Space_Surveillance_Telescope.jpg)
*Observatory : Space Surveillance Telescope, New Mexico.*

### Example 2 

Although one of the strengths of <span><span>Peeragogy</span></span> is
to distribute the workload, this does not mean that infrastructure is
irrelevant. The students and researchers of the future university will
need access to an Observatory and other scientific apparatus if they are
to reach *ad astra, per aspera* (Figure 1).[^fnref7]

### What’s Next in the Peeragogy Project*

We intend to revise and extend the *Patterns of Peeragogy* into a
framework that can describe and scaffold the learning that happens
inside and outside of institutions.

### References

1. Christopher Alexander, Sara Ishikawa, and Murray Silverstein. 1977.
*A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction*. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.

2. Benjamin Mako Hill. 2011. When Free Software Isn’t (Practically)
Better. Retrieved from <http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/when_free_software_isnt_practically_better.html>

3. Daniel Kreiss, Megan Finn, and Fred Turner. 2011. The limits of peer
production: Some reminders from Max Weber for the network society. *New
Media & Society* 13, 2: 243–259.

4. Jacques Rancière. \[1987\] 1991. *The ignorant schoolmaster: Five
lessons in intellectual emancipation*. Stanford University Press.

5. Eric S Raymond. 2001. *The Cathedral & the Bazaar: Musings on Linux
and open source by an accidental revolutionary*. O’Reilly Media, Inc.

6. H. Rheingold and others. 2015. *The Peeragogy Handbook*.
PubDomEd/Pierce Press, Chicago, IL./Somerville, MA. Retrieved from <http://peeragogy.org>

7. J. P. Schmidt. 2009. Commons-Based Peer Production and education. *Free Culture Research Workshop, Harvard University*: 1–3. Retrieved from <http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/fcrw/sites/fcrw/images/Schmidt_Education_FreeCulture_25Oct2009.pdf>

8. Till Schümmer, Joerg M Haake, and Wolfgang Stark. 2014. Beyond rational design patterns. *Proceedings of the 19th european conference on pattern languages of programs*, ACM, 13 pp.

9. Aaron Shaw and Benjamin Mako Hill. 2014. Laboratories of Oligarchy?: How the iron law extends to peer production. *Journal of Communication* 64, 2: 215–238.

10. Aaron Swartz. 2006. Who Writes Wikipedia? Retrieved from <http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

[^fnref1]: <https://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Mission_statement>

[^fnref2]: <https://www.wikimedia.org/>

[^fnref3]: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikimedia_Foundation#Employees>

[^fnref4]: <http://phx.corporate-ir.net/phoenix.zhtml?c=97664&p=irol-newsArticle&ID=2100418>

[^fnref5]: <https://www.google.com/finance?cid=695431>

[^fnref6]: <http://www.alexa.com/topsites>

[^fnref7]: Latin: “With difficulty, to the stars.”

