#+title: Reduce, reuse, recycle
#+FIRN_ORDER: 10

* Motivation
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: motivation
    :END:

This pattern can guide project participants in identifying and managing
available resources.

* Context
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: context
    :END:

In a peer production context, you are simultaneously "making stuff" and
building on the work of others.

* Forces
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: forces
    :END:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  [[file:images/derivative.png]] *Derivative*: you don't have to do
  everything yourself!

  [[file:images/sensemaking.png]] *Sensemaking*: resources are useful
  only when you can make sense of them.

  [[file:images/sharing.png]] *Sharing*: your understanding gains
  robustness when you share with others.
#+END_QUOTE

* Problem
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: problem
    :END:

Many projects die because the cost of
[[http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?ReinventingTheWheel][Reinventing the Wheel]]
[c2] is too high. However, this is just one possible symptom of
overfocus on a few priorities. Concerns may also arise if the project's
output is not actually used by anyone.

* Solution
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: solution
    :END:

"Steal like an artist," and make it possible for other people to build
on your work too. In the Peeragogy project, we have used off-the-shelf
and hosted software suited to the task at hand (including: Drupal,
Google+, Google Hangouts, Google Docs, Wordpress, pandoc, Github,
ShareLaTeX). Early on we agreed to release our /Peeragogy Handbook/
under the terms of the Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication (CC0),
the legal instrument that grants the greatest possible leeway to
downstream users.[fn:1] This has allowed us and others to repurpose and
improve its contents in other settings, including the current paper.
Follow the steps indicated by the keywords in the pattern's title:

- /Reduce/ the panoply of interesting interrelated ideas and methods to
  a functional core (e.g.Â writing a book).
- /Reuse/ resources relevant to this aim, factoring in "things I was
  going to have to do anyway" from everyone involved.
- /Recycle/ what you've created in new connections and relationships.

[[file:images/Duchamp_Fountaine.jpg]]\\
/A paradigmatic example of found-art. "Fountain by R. Mutt, Photograph
by Alfred Stieglitz, THE EXHIBIT REFUSED BY THE INDEPENDENTS"./

* Rationale
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: rationale
    :END:

Clearly we are not the first people to notice the problems with
wheel-reinvention, including "missing opportunities, repeating common
mistakes, and working harder than we need to."[fn:2] As a guest in one
of our hangouts, Willow Brugh, of Geeks without Bounds and the MIT Media
Lab, remarked that /people often think that they need to build a
community, and so fail to recognize that they are already part of a
community./[fn:3] converted our old pattern catalog from the /Peeragogy
Handbook/ into this paper, sharing it with a new community and gaining
new perspectives; could we do something similar again?

* Resolution
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: resolution
    :END:

Reweaving old material into *derivative* designs and new material into
existing frameworks, we build deeper understanding, and carry out
collective *sensemaking*. The project's Roadmap develops by making sense
of existing resources -- including our worries and concerns. Often we
only know what these are when we attempt to *share* them. Drawing on a
wide range of resources boosts our collective Carrying capacity.

* Example 1
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: example-1
    :END:

Contributors are encouraged to recycle existing works that are
compatible with the Wikimedia-wide Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike (CC-By-SA) license.[fn:4] Some sub-projects have
been created purely to help repurpose other existing works in this
way.[fn:5] On the downstream side, DBPedia is an important resource for
the semantic web, built by collating data from Wikipedia's
"infoboxes."[fn:6] themselves increasingly being populated automatically
using information from WikiData.[fn:7] able to develop tools that reuse
Wikipedia content in other ways [1,2], However, these research projects
do not always result in a tool that is accessible to day-to-day users.

* Example 2
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: example-2
    :END:

The knowledge resources and collaboration tools currently available
online are what make a low-cost, high-quality, formally-accredited
future university conceivable. However, the available resources are not
always as organized as they would need to be for educative purposes, so
peeragogues can usefully put effort into Reduce, reuse, recycle'ing
available resources into a functioning university Library.

* What's Next in the Peeragogy Project
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: whats-next-in-the-peeragogy-project
    :END:

Are there other educational resources and peeragogical case studies that
we could fold into our work? Can we recycle material from the /Peeragogy
Handbook/ into a format that is easier to understand and apply?

* References
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: references
    :END:

1. Silvan Reinhold. 2006. WikiTrails: Augmenting wiki structure for
   collaborative, interdisciplinary learning. /Proceedings of the 2006
   International Symposium on Wikis/, ACM, 47--58.

2. Nathalie Henry Riche, Bongshin Lee, and Fanny Chevalier. 2010.
   IChase: Supporting exploration and awareness of editing activities on
   Wikipedia. /Proceedings of the International Conference on Advanced
   Visual Interfaces/, ACM, 59--66.

--------------

[fn:1] [[https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/]]

[fn:2] [[https://blog.wikimedia.org/2013/11/19/learning-patterns-new-way-share-important-lessons/]]

[fn:3] [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NpyQfYVKfBI]]

[fn:4] [[https://creativecommons.org/weblog/entry/15411/]]

[fn:5] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProject_Mathematics/PlanetMath_Exchange]]

[fn:6] [[http://wiki.dbpedia.org/]]

[fn:7] [[https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Main_Page]]

