<html><head><meta charset="utf-8" /><meta content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" name="viewport" /><meta content="" name="author" /><meta content="" name="description" /><title></title><link href="/static/css/firn_base.css" rel="stylesheet" /></head><body><main><article class="content"><div><div><section></section><div class="firn-headline-section firn-headline-section-1"><h1 class="firn-headline firn-headline-1" id="1-intention:-what-do-we-expect-to-learn-or-make-together?"><span class="firn-headline-text"><span>1. Intention: what do we expect to learn or make together?</span></span></h1><section><p><span>Solidify our group
Have more time to talk
Prune some of the good ideas</span></p></section></div><div class="firn-headline-section firn-headline-section-1"><h1 class="firn-headline firn-headline-1" id="2-establish-what-is-happening:-what-and-how-are-we-learning?"><span class="firn-headline-text"><span>2. Establish what is happening: what and how are we learning?</span></span></h1><section><p><span>Discussed, came with notes from last week</span></p></section></div><div class="firn-headline-section firn-headline-section-1"><h1 class="firn-headline firn-headline-1" id="3-what-are-some-different-perspectives-on-what’s-happening?"><span class="firn-headline-text"><span>3. What are some different perspectives on what’s happening?</span></span></h1><section><p><span>Having a better way to have a garden of notes
LV: Thinking I was speaking a lot
JC: Leo had a bit of crackle
LV: wants to try to give voice
Telephone interface perspective — others may want to join by phone
Jitsi could be an opportunity
BBB has some extra features? FSF controls.
You need to be a sponsor of FSF to use their Jitsi, but not sure if they support phone calls
David: thanks for being patient w/ me as non-researcher answering my questions about Org Roam!</span></p></section></div><div class="firn-headline-section firn-headline-section-1"><h1 class="firn-headline firn-headline-1" id="4-what-did-we-learn-or-change?"><span class="firn-headline-text"><span>4. What did we learn or change?</span></span></h1><section><p><span>"Emacs Research Group"
"How to support transdisciplinary research?"
1-to-1 tutorials as way to go forward
Learning about Org Roam
AUS-ERG to coord w/ as we go forward</span></p></section></div><div class="firn-headline-section firn-headline-section-1"><h1 class="firn-headline firn-headline-1" id="5-what-else-should-we-change-going-forward?"><span class="firn-headline-text"><span>5. What else should we change going forward?</span></span></h1><section><p><span>Could switch moderator role from time to time?
Can also have Leo be ongoing moderator if he’s up for that!
David’s tutorial material will be ready to look at
NA: Will want some help to set up + use the tech
Many can look into the Logseq/OR/Firn ecosystem
Meeting w/ Jethro can be challenging (but worth it)
Leo, please follow up w/ JC about paper!
Meta-review of PARs later?
DOT+LV, looking at Peeragogy book
Allow up to 2 hours to discuss? — But we will put all the key things in 1st hour
Use David’s 1-to-1 as a template
Schedule further 1-to-1s for January?
Meeting 19th — followed by break</span></p></section></div></div></div></article></main></body></html>