<html><head><meta charset="utf-8" /><meta content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" name="viewport" /><meta content="" name="author" /><meta content="" name="description" /><title></title><link href="/static/css/firn_base.css" rel="stylesheet" /></head><body><main><article class="content"><div><div><section></section><div class="firn-headline-section firn-headline-section-1"><h1 class="firn-headline firn-headline-1" id="navigation"><span class="firn-headline-text"><span>Navigation</span></span></h1><section><p><span>Next: </span><a class="firn-internal" href="/pars/emacs_research_group_12_december_2020">Emacs Research Group 12 December 2020</a></p></section></div><div class="firn-headline-section firn-headline-section-1"><h1 class="firn-headline firn-headline-1" id="review-the-intention:-what-do-we-expect-to-learn-or-make-together?"><span class="firn-headline-text"><span>Review the intention: what do we expect to learn or make together?</span></span></h1><section><p><span>Joe Noorah and Leo wanted to convene a meeting with interested parties in Emacs+Research
Address longstanding worry about "wait until next year"
Part of a greater sense of trying to do something with EmacsConf to federate the community</span></p></section></div><div class="firn-headline-section firn-headline-section-1"><h1 class="firn-headline firn-headline-1" id="establish-what-is-happening:-what-and-how-are-we-learning?"><span class="firn-headline-text"><span>Establish what is happening: what and how are we learning?</span></span></h1><section><p><span>Met for an initial 70 minute meeting (via Zoom)
Everyone shared a brief intro and ideas so we got to know each other
Joe took notes via screenshare... we all took notes (as academics)</span></p></section></div><div class="firn-headline-section firn-headline-section-1"><h1 class="firn-headline firn-headline-1" id="what-are-some-different-perspectives-on-what’s-happening?"><span class="firn-headline-text"><span>What are some different perspectives on what’s happening?</span></span></h1><section><p><span>Cameron: We are meeting for the first time so there’s a lot of intro information
We generally agreed that we want to make something that exposes intrinsic value of using these tools
Vaguely agreed on follow-up directions, this seems to be a general consensus, often with full agreement (e.g. on testing and making a collaborative Org Roam work, to further cement as tool for collective thinking in combination w/ individual)
David: there are ways I could help out with extra elisp, helping figure out a package, intro elisp workshop
Joe: Leo did an amazing job facilitating the meeting
Ray: I was impressed by the diversity of the group in background & levels of use</span></p></section></div><div class="firn-headline-section firn-headline-section-1"><h1 class="firn-headline firn-headline-1" id="what-did-we-learn-or-change?"><span class="firn-headline-text"><span>What did we learn or change?</span></span></h1><section><p><span>We can do this!
We feel empowered
Wonderful outcome from attending EmacsConf 2020!
Public Policy conference: (How to get a grant?)</span></p></section></div><div class="firn-headline-section firn-headline-section-1"><h1 class="firn-headline firn-headline-1" id="what-else-should-we-change-going-forward?"><span class="firn-headline-text"><span>What else should we change going forward?</span></span></h1><section><p><span>Ongoing dialogue
Maybe with breakout groups
Need for governance for this; getting public, taking time we need going forward
Many actions need to be taken forward but we have too many right now: maybe this should be the next objective to pick a good viable project to go after now
Can set up a shared Org Roam + Firn instance: do we want to use this?
Can work have something similar w/in Org Roam
Someone to schedule the next meeting... accomodate UTC+8, maybe use BBB; Leo will publish scheduler</span></p></section></div></div></div></article></main></body></html>