#+TITLE: Research on/with/in Emacs
* Navigation
Next: [[file:emacs_research_group_12_december_2020.org][Emacs Research Group 12 December 2020]]
* Review the intention: what do we expect to learn or make together?
Joe Noorah and Leo wanted to convene a meeting with interested parties in Emacs+Research
Address longstanding worry about "wait until next year"
Part of a greater sense of trying to do something with EmacsConf to federate the community

* Establish what is happening: what and how are we learning?
Met for an initial 70 minute meeting (via Zoom)
Everyone shared a brief intro and ideas so we got to know each other
Joe took notes via screenshare... we all took notes (as academics)

* What are some different perspectives on what’s happening?
Cameron: We are meeting for the first time so there’s a lot of intro information
We generally agreed that we want to make something that exposes intrinsic value of using these tools
Vaguely agreed on follow-up directions, this seems to be a general consensus, often with full agreement (e.g. on testing and making a collaborative Org Roam work, to further cement as tool for collective thinking in combination w/ individual)
David: there are ways I could help out with extra elisp, helping figure out a package, intro elisp workshop
Joe: Leo did an amazing job facilitating the meeting
Ray: I was impressed by the diversity of the group in background & levels of use
* What did we learn or change?
We can do this!
We feel empowered
Wonderful outcome from attending EmacsConf 2020!
Public Policy conference: (How to get a grant?)
* What else should we change going forward?
Ongoing dialogue
Maybe with breakout groups
Need for governance for this; getting public, taking time we need going forward
Many actions need to be taken forward but we have too many right now: maybe this should be the next objective to pick a good viable project to go after now
Can set up a shared Org Roam + Firn instance: do we want to use this?
Can work have something similar w/in Org Roam
Someone to schedule the next meeting... accomodate UTC+8, maybe use BBB; Leo will publish scheduler
