#+title: Peeragogy
#+FIRN_ORDER: 8

* Motivation
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: motivation
    :END:

This pattern is relevant to anyone who wants to do active learning
together with others in a relatively non-hierarchical setting.

* Context
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: context
    :END:

Collaborative projects like Wikipedia, StackExchange, and FLOSS
represent an implicit challenge to the old "industrial" organization of
work. This new way of working appears to promise something more
resilient, more exciting, and more humane. The rhetoric has been
questioned [3,9]. In and across these "free", "open", post-modern
organizations, individual participants are learning [7] -- and that they
collectively change the methods and infrastructure as they go. Because
everyone in these projects primarily learns by putting in effort on a
shared work-in-progress, participants are more in touch with an
/equality of intelligence/ than an /inequality of knowledge/ [4:38,
119]. At the same time, they invoke a form of friendly competition, in
which /the best craftmanship wins/ [5:89].

* Forces
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: forces
    :END:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  [[file:images/threshold.png]] *Threshold*: inclusiveness and
  specificity are in tension.

  [[file:images/trust.png]] *Trust*: is only built through sharing and
  reciprocity.
#+END_QUOTE

* Problem
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: problem
    :END:

Even a highly successful project like Wikipedia is a work in progress
that can be improved to /better/ empower and engage people around the
world, to develop /richer and more useful/ educational content, and to
disseminate it /more/ effectively -- and deploy it more
creatively.[fn:1] How to go about this is a difficult question, and we
don't know the answers in advance. There are rigorous challenges facing
smaller projects as well, and fewer resources to draw on. Many
successful free software projects are not particularly collaborative --
and the largest projects are edited only by a small minority of users
[2,10]. Can we work smarter together?

* Solution
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: solution
    :END:

The act of asking "can we work smarter together?" puts learning front
and center. Peeragogy takes that "center" and distributes it across a
pool of heterogeneous relationships. Indeed, peeragogy can be understood
as an up-to-date revision of Alexander's Network of Learning [1:99]. It
/decentralizes the process of learning and enriches it through contact
with many places and people/ in interconnected networks that may reach
all over the world. Importantly, while people involved in a peeragogical
process may be collaborating on [[file:a_specific_project.org][A specific project]], they don't have to
be direct collaborators outside of the learning context or co-located in
time or space. Just as theories and practices of pedagogy articulate the
transmission of knowledge from teachers to students, peeragogy
articulates the way peers produce and use knowledge together
(Figure [fig:connections]).

* Rationale
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: rationale
    :END:

The peeragogical approach particularly addresses the problems of small
projects stuck in their individual silos, and large projects becoming
overwhelmed by their own complexity. It does this by going the opposite
route: explicating /what by definition is tacit/ and employing
/a continuous design process/ [8:9--10]. As Howard Rheingold remarks in the
foreword to the /Peeragogy Handbook/: "What made this work? Polycentric
leadership is one key" [6:iii]. "Peer-led" shouldn't suggest that there
are no leaders: rather, it means that multiple leaders act as peers.

* Resolution
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: resolution
    :END:

Peeragogy helps people in different projects describe and solve real
problems. If you share the problems that you're experiencing with
others, there's a reasonable chance that someone may be able to help you
solve them. Bringing a problem across the *threshold* of someone else's
awareness helps achieve clarity. This process can guide individual
action in ways that we wouldn't have seen on our own, and may lead to
new forms of collective action we would never have imagined possible.
People who gain experience comprehending problems together build
*trust*. Making room for multiple right answers contributes further to
resolving the tension between generality and specificity.

* Example 1
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: example-1
    :END:

Wikipedia and its sister sites Wiktionary, Wikiversity, etc.
(collectively "Wikimedia") rely on user-generated content, peer produced
software, and are managed, by and large, by a pool of users who choose
to get involved with governance and other "meta" duties.[fn:2] The
Wikimedia Foundation maintains the servers and acts on behalf of this
"global movement". They achieve something quite impressive: Wikipedia is
the 7th most popular website in the world, but the Wikimedia Foundation
has under 300 employees. For comparison, the 6th (Amazon) and 8th (QQ)
most popular websites are run by companies with over 200K and 28K
employees, respectively.[fn:3],[fn:4],[fn:5],[fn:6]

#+CAPTION: /Observatory : Space Surveillance Telescope, New Mexico./
[[file:images/Space_Surveillance_Telescope.jpg]]

* Example 2
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: example-2
    :END:

Although one of the strengths of Peeragogy is to distribute the
workload, this does not mean that infrastructure is irrelevant. The
students and researchers of the future university will need access to an
Observatory and other scientific apparatus if they are to reach /ad astra, per aspera/ (Figure 1).[fn:7]

* What's Next in the Peeragogy Project
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: whats-next-in-the-peeragogy-project
    :END:

We intend to revise and extend the /Patterns of Peeragogy/ into a
framework that can describe and scaffold the learning that happens
inside and outside of institutions.

* References
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: references
    :END:

1.  Christopher Alexander, Sara Ishikawa, and Murray Silverstein. 1977.
    /A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction/. Oxford
    University Press, Oxford.

2.  Benjamin Mako Hill. 2011. When Free Software Isn't (Practically)
    Better. Retrieved from
    [[http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/when_free_software_isnt_practically_better.html]]

3.  Daniel Kreiss, Megan Finn, and Fred Turner. 2011. The limits of peer
    production: Some reminders from Max Weber for the network society.
    /New Media & Society/ 13, 2: 243--259.

4.  Jacques Rancière. [1987] 1991. /The ignorant schoolmaster: Five
    lessons in intellectual emancipation/. Stanford University Press.

5.  Eric S Raymond. 2001. /The Cathedral & the Bazaar: Musings on Linux
    and open source by an accidental revolutionary/. O'Reilly Media,
    Inc.

6.  H. Rheingold and others. 2015. /The Peeragogy Handbook/.
    PubDomEd/Pierce Press, Chicago, IL./Somerville, MA. Retrieved from
    [[http://peeragogy.org]]

7.  J. P. Schmidt. 2009. Commons-Based Peer Production and education.
    /Free Culture Research Workshop, Harvard University/: 1--3.
    Retrieved from
    [[http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/fcrw/sites/fcrw/images/Schmidt_Education_FreeCulture_25Oct2009.pdf]]

8.  Till Schümmer, Joerg M Haake, and Wolfgang Stark. 2014. Beyond
    rational design patterns. /Proceedings of the 19th european
    conference on pattern languages of programs/, ACM, 13 pp.

9.  Aaron Shaw and Benjamin Mako Hill. 2014. Laboratories of Oligarchy?:
    How the iron law extends to peer production. /Journal of
    Communication/ 64, 2: 215--238.

10. Aaron Swartz. 2006. Who Writes Wikipedia? Retrieved from
    [[http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia]]

--------------

* Notes
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: notes
    :END:

[fn:1] [[https://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Mission_statement]]

[fn:2] [[https://www.wikimedia.org/]]

[fn:3] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikimedia_Foundation#Employees]]

[fn:4] [[http://phx.corporate-ir.net/phoenix.zhtml?c=97664&p=irol-newsArticle&ID=2100418]]

[fn:5] [[https://www.google.com/finance?cid=695431]]

[fn:6] [[http://www.alexa.com/topsites]]

[fn:7] Latin: "With difficulty, to the stars."

