#+title: Roadmap
#+FIRN_ORDER: 9

* Motivation
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: motivation
    :END:

This pattern shows how your group can define the scope of their project
and make a realistic plan to address it. This pattern provides the
backbone of our pattern language. It can be used to find a shared goal.

* Context
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: context
    :END:

[[http://peeragogy.github.io/pattern-peeragogy.html][Peeragogy]] has
both distributed and centralized aspects. The discussants or
contributors who collaborate on a project have different points of view
and heterogeneous priorities, but they come together in conversations
and joint activities.

* Forces
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: forces
    :END:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  [[file:images/variety.png]] *Variety*: people have different goals and
  interests in mind.

  [[file:images/clarity.png]] *Clarity*: some goals may be quite
  specific, and some rather vague.

  [[file:images/coherence.png]] *Coherence*: only some of these goals
  will be well-aligned.
#+END_QUOTE

* Problem
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: problem
    :END:

In order to collaborate, people need a way to share current, though
incomplete, understanding of the space they are working in, and to
nurture relationships with one another and the other elements of this
space. At the outset, there may not even be a coherent vision for a
project -- but a only loose collection of motivations and sentiments.
Once the project is up and running, people are likely to pull in
different directions.

* Solution
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: solution
    :END:

Building a guide to the goals, activities, experiments and working
methods can help [[file:newcomer.org][Newcomers]] and old-timers alike understand their
relationship with the project. It may combine features of a manifesto, a
syllabus, and an issue tracker. It may be a design pattern or a pattern
language [3]. The distinguishing qualities of a project Roadmap are that
it should be adaptive to circumstances, and that it should ultimately
get us from /here/ to /there/. By this same token, any given version of
the roadmap is seen as fallible. In lieu of widespread participation,
the project's [[file:wrapper.org][Wrapper]] should attempt to synthesize an accurate roadmap
that is informed by participants' behavior, and should help moderate in
case of conflict. Nevertheless, full consensus is not necessary:
different goals, with different /heres/ and /theres/, can be pursued
separately, while maintaining communication.

* Rationale
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: rationale
    :END:

The group evolves from a less-sophisticated to a more-sophisticated
manner of operating by using the roadmap. Using the roadmap builds a
collective awareness of how things are working in practice. In the
Peeragogy project our initial roadmap was a "crowdsourced" outline of
the first edition of the /Peeragogy Handbook/. Later, it took the form
of a schedule of meetings following a regular [[file:heartbeat.org][Heartbeat]], supplemented by
a list of upcoming deadlines. Most recently, our roadmap is expressed in
the emergent objectives collected at the end of current paper. We have
seen that a list of nice-to-have features created in a top-down fashion
is comparatively unlikely to go anywhere! A backlog of tasks and a
realistic plan for accomplishing them are vastly different things. An
adaptive roadmap is an antidote to Tunnel Vision [1].

* Resolution
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: resolution
    :END:

An emergent roadmap is rooted in real problems and justifiable
solutions-in-progress in all their *variety* and communicates both
resolution and follow-through. The process of meshing varied issues with
one another requires thought and discussion, and this encourages
*clarity*. The test of *coherence* is that contributed goals and ideas
should be actionable. The ultimate quality-control test is if it worked,
i.e., did it come to pass that the task(s) the roadmap was created to
achieve ended up being achieved? If all of the issues that the roadmap
outlines are not resolved, the roadmap itself should be revised. Without
a roadmap, we would never know.

* Example 1
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: example-1
    :END:

The /Help/ link present on every Wikipedia page could be seen as a
localized Roadmap for individual user engagement: it tells users what
they can do with the site, and gives instructions on how to do it.[fn:1]
someone who knows what they're doing, there are around 30 pages listing
articles with various kinds of problems, for example articles tagged
with style issues, or "orphaned" articles (i.e., articles with no links
from other pages in the encyclopedia).[fn:2],[fn:3],[fn:4] In 2010-2011,
Wikimedia developed a strategic plan drawing on community input [2]. In
2015, a two-week Community Consultation was carried out; synthesis
resulted in "a direction that will guide the decisions for the
organization."[fn:5] Community-organized WikiProjects often invite and
guide involvement on A specific project.

* Example 2
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: example-2
    :END:

In a future university run in a peer produced manner, a fancy
President's Residence presumably wouldn't be needed. Leadership would be
carried out in a more collaborative and distributed fashion. However,
depending on just how distributed things are, it may turn out to be
useful for project facilitators to gather at a University Hall. Whereas
there is strength in numbers, there is leverage in organization. This is
what the Roadmap provides.

[[file:images/alabama-small.jpg]]
/President's Residence, University of Alabama./

* What's Next in the Peeragogy Project
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: whats-next-in-the-peeragogy-project
    :END:

If it becomes clear that something needs to change about the project,
that is a clue that we might need to revise our patterns or record a new
one. We can use the names of the patterns to tag our upcoming tasks.

* References
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: references
    :END:

1. David M. Dikel, David Kane, and James R. Wilson. 2001. /Software
   architecture: Organizational principles and patterns/. Pearson
   Education.

2. Eugene Eric Kim and others. 2011. /Wikimedia Strategic Plan: A
   collaborative vision for the movement through 2015/. Wikimedia
   Foundation.

3. Christian Kohls. 2010. The structure of patterns. /Proceedings of the
   17th Conference on Pattern Languages of Programs/, ACM, 12.

--------------

[fn:1] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Contents]]

[fn:2] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Wikipedia_article_cleanup]]

[fn:3] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Wikipedia_articles_with_style_issues]]

[fn:4] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:All_orphaned_articles]]

[fn:5] [[https://blog.wikimedia.org/2015/02/23/strategy-consultation/]]

